---
layout: post
title:  "Testing Round 16"
date:   2021-05-29 23:08:00 +0700
categories: FreeContest
---

Today, Free Contest held [Testing Round 16](https://www.facebook.com/kc97blf/posts/3598459260379883), for testing the system.

I solved 4 problems, but I'm not really happy, since I do think I could've solved the last unsolved problem.

# AQUERY2
**Statement**: There are `Q` queries and an empty array. Each query includes two integers `a` and `b`, and you'll have to insert `a` into the array `b` times. Find the `k`-th smallest integer in the array.

**Trivia**: This problem has the shortest statement, so I went for it first. Unfortunately, it took me a few submissions to realize I forgot that `k` can exceed the value range of `int`. I even tried to stress test, saw that nothing went wrong, then became heavily confused and enraged.

**Solution**: Use a map (it has to be a map for convenience, not any kind of hash maps). A red-black-tree map gives the advantage that the keys are sorted. We will use this map as a counting array, where `cnt[x] = y` means there are `y` copies of `x`. Traverse through the map, if `k <= y`, then `x` is the answer; otherwise reduce `k` by `y`.

# CPREFIX
**Statement**: Given a string `s`. For each prefix from `s[0]` to `s[i]`, count how many times it appears in the string.

**Trivia**: I tried to come up with a solution using Z-algorithm (I don't know how to code KMP). I was still a bit mad because of things that had happened at the previous problem. I have decided to just go to [cp-algorithms](https://cp-algorithms.com/string/prefix-function.html) and copied their code. Luckily, there is also a section where they solved the exact problem, so I went with it. After the contest finished, I came up with a hash solution (which happens to be the same as the editorial), and a solution using Z-algorithm (counting the occurrences in the `z[]` array, prefix sum and stuff).

**Solution**: Just visit the link below. I know, KMP is hard, but you can straight up use the `pi[]` array to answer.

# TASKSET
**Statement**: X is a beautiful number if `X = 2^n` or `X = 3 * 2^n`. Given N, reduce N by one the least amount of times until N is beautiful. Find that number of times.

**Trivia**: This is probably one of the easiest problems in the problemset. I made no mistake this time, implementing a quick brute-force with a few lines of code.

**Solution**: Just brute-force? It's very simple, but be careful in case integer overflow occurs.

# WARP
**Statement**: Given an array `a` of size `n`. You start at index `1`. You can go from index `i` to index `j` if:

* i < j
* There exists a number `k` so that `floor(a[i] / 2^k)` and `floor(a[j] / 2^k)` are both odd.

Now, the number of paths to go from index `i` to index `j` is defined as the number of different `k`'s that satisfy the above statement.

Find the number of different paths from index `1` to index `n`.

**Trivia**: I found the `O(n^2)` solution after thinking for a while, but struggled to optimize it. I tried different ways, but only one really works. I raged, slammed the table like a true gamer, and screamed. But, I managed to get back and successfully solved the problem.

**Solution**: Notice the following property:
```
floor(x / 2^k) == (x >> k)
```

So, if `floor(x / 2^k)` is odd, then the right-most bit of `x >> k` is `1`, or:
```
(x >> k & 1) == 1
```

If there exists a number `k` that satisfies the condition, then:
```
(x >> k & 1) == (y >> k & 1) == 1
```
or, the `k`-th bits of `x` and `y` are both `1`.

Which means, the number of different `k`'s that satisfy the condition is the number of bit `1` of `(x & y)`.

Denoting `dp[x]` as the number of paths from `1` to `x`, one can quickly construct an `O(n^2)` solution like this:
```cpp
dp[1] = 1;

for (int i = 2; i <= n; ++i) {
    for (int j = i - 1; j >= 1; --j) {
        dp[i] += dp[j] * __builtin_popcount(a[i] & a[j]);
    }
}
```

But, how can this be optimized? I discovered this after trying to calculate the sum of `popcount(a[i] & a[j])` for every pair of `(i, j)`.

We use another array, called `cnt`, and it will have around 32 elements. `cnt[x]` will tell how many numbers so far have the `x`-th bit equal to 1. Clearly, for each number `a[i]`, we traverse through each bit of it. If its `x`-th bit is off, then we can safely ignore. If it is on, however, we need to count every number before `a[i]` that also have their `x`-th bits on.

```cpp
for (int j = 0; j < 32; ++j) {
    if (a[1] >> j & 1) {
        ++cnt[j];
    }
}

int sum = 0;

for (int i = 2; i <= n; ++i) {
    for (int j = 0; j < 32; ++j) {
        if (a[i] >> j & 1) {
            sum += cnt[j];
        }
    }

    for (int j = 0; j < 32; ++j) {
        if (a[i] >> j & 1) {
            ++cnt[j];
        }
    }
}
```

By reusing this formula,
```cpp
dp[i] += dp[j] * __builtin_popcount(a[i] & a[j]);
```

instead of adding `1` to `cnt[x]`, we will add the whole value of `dp[i]` like this:

```cpp
dp[1] = 1;

for (int j = 0; j < 32; ++j) {
    if (a[1] >> j & 1) {
        cnt[j] += dp[1];
    }
}


for (int i = 2; i <= n; ++i) {
    for (int j = 0; j < 32; ++j) {
        if (a[i] >> j & 1) {
            dp[i] += cnt[j];
        }
    }

    for (int j = 0; j < 32; ++j) {
        if (a[i] >> j & 1) {
            cnt[j] += dp[i];
        }
    }
}
```
