---
layout: post
title:  "Codeforces Round #722 (Div. 2)"
date:   2021-05-25 03:00:00 +0700
categories: programming
---

[Codeforces Round #722](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/90986) was held ~~today~~ yesterday (holy shit it's already 3AM). I had quite a roller coaster of emotions, tbh. It was a combined round, so I was somewhat worried. The score distribution was released and I almost lost my mind there.

I started solving Div2A and Div2B quite quickly (compared to my normal performances, but still slow in general). I somewhat struggled with C, but then I decided to give it a try and got accepted (lost one submission because of integer overflow smh ;-;). Overall, I was hesitant when solving these problems, some cost me a lot of rating.

# A. Eshag Loves Big Arrays
A very easy problem. As expected from a Div2A. I was really quick to implement the solution and submitted right away.

Notice that, if `a < b` then `a < (a + b) / 2 < b`. So, no matter which we choose, only the larger numbers get deleted. That means the numbers with minimum value will stay. We just have to find the minimum value, and count how many of them there are in the array.

**Submission**: [117267118](https://codeforces.com/contest/1529/submission/117267118)

# B. Sifid and Strange Subsequences
I was slightly slow on this problem, but I was still within top 700 when I got AC. Things were still fine right then, my performance was <span style="color:blue">Expert</span>-level.

We can see that, the statement asks that `min |ai - aj| >= Max` for every pair of `(i, j)`. It's trivial that `min |ai - aj|` is the difference of 2 adjacent numbers of the **sorted** array.

Define `d[i]` as `min(d[i - 1], |a[i] - a[i - 1]|)`. The array is sorted, which means `a[i]` is the maximum element from `1` to `i`, and `d[i]` is the minimum difference. If `d[i] < a[i]`, the condition of `min |ai - aj| >= Max` fails, `i` will be the answer (assuming the array is `0`-based). In case `d[i] >= a[i]` for every `i`, the answer is obviously `n`.

**Submission**: [117267141](https://codeforces.com/contest/1529/submission/117267141)

I found a nicer greedy solution. Take all non-positive integers (this is true because `Max <= 0`, and absolute value will always be non-negative). Then, at most one positive integer can be taken.

**Submission**: [117218964](https://codeforces.com/contest/1529/submission/117218964)

# C. Parsa's Humongous Tree
I struggled ***HARD***, for no reasons at all. I tried looking for all possibilities, confused thinking about which value in the range `[Lu; Ru]` should be taken for `Au`. Then, when the contest had around 45 minutes left, I decided that I would go all-in, that `Au` would either be `Lu` or `Ru`, without proving (and it turned out to be correct).

I quickly coded the solution, but it failed sample tests. I noticed that I wrote `=` instead of `+=`, and that alone wasted so much debugging time I shouldn't have lost.

Anyway, it's a very standard DP-on-tree problem. `dp[u][0]` is the maximum value at node `u`, if `Au = Lu`. Similarly, `dp[u][1]` is the maximum value at node `u`, if `Au = Ru`.

Consider the case when `u` can travel to `v` (or `u` is the ancestor/parent of `v`). If you are familiar with DP-on-tree, the DP formula is very trivial.

```cpp
void DFS(int u, int p) {
    for (int v : g[u])
        if (v == p) continue;
 
        DFS(v, u);
        dp[u][0] += max(
                        abs(L[u] - L[v]) + dp[v][0],
                        abs(L[u] - R[v]) + dp[v][1]
                      );
        dp[u][1] += max(
                        abs(R[u] - L[v]) + dp[v][0],
                        abs(R[u] - R[v]) + dp[v][1]
                      );
    }
}
```

I also made a minor mistake that costed me a submission: integer overflow. So, remember to check for that as well.
The last-minute effort (well, not really, but I was about to break down and rage-quit) saved me some rating. I am glad that I got accepted, and I am glad that there are friends who still support me even when I'm in a big struggle.

**Submission**: [117267676](https://codeforces.com/contest/1529/submission/117267676)

# Final words
This contest was really fun (because I got accepted right on the verge of rage-quitting so it was satisfying :D). I somewhat like the problems, they can be used as teaching materials. I tried reading the editorial and explanations on D, and it took me 3 hours to understand, so I wouldn't really want to write anything about that problem here.

Still, I'm a bit disappointed at myself for not keeping up the <span style="color:blue">Expert</span>-level performance throughout the contest, which kind of makes me question whether I have ever made a progress.
