---
layout: post
title:  "Free Contest 126"
date:   2021-05-22 23:00:00 +0700
categories: programming
---

[Free Contest 126](https://www.facebook.com/kc97blf/photos/a.1881533165405843/3592513880974421/) has been finished tonight. I got the 18th place, which is fairly normal, although I expected a lot more.<br/>
There are editorial for all the problems, but I feel like I want to explain a bit more.

I couldn't solve **CANDY**, and I almost got **ATRAVEL**.

# LETTERS
**Statement**: A string of size `n` contains `'a'`, `'b'`, or `'?'`. You can replace `'?'` with either `'a'` or `'b'`. After replacing all the `'?'`, for each adjacent pair of characters, we define the following:<br/>

* "aa" = 0
* "ab" = 1
* "bb" = 0
* "ba" = -1

The total value of the string is the sum of values of all adjacent pairs. Find the maximum possible value with the given string.

**Trivia**: I was the second person in the contest to get AC for this problem (the first is [darkkcyan](https://codeforces.com/profile/darkkcyan), the top 1 guy who solved all problems in the contest). Tbh, I don't like the official editorial for this problem.

**Solution**: Let's create a new array called `a`, and assign `a[i]` to `1` if `s[i] == 'a'`, or `0` if otherwise.<br/>
If you calculate the value of the string, it will look something like:<br/>
```
(a[0] - a[1]) + (a[1] - a[2]) + ... + (a[n - 2] - a[n - 1])
```
or, we can rearrange the terms like:
```
a[0] + (-a[1] + a[1]) + (-a[2] + a[2]) + ... + (-a[n - 2] + a[n - 2]) - a[n - 1]
```
Cancelling out the terms, we are left with:
```
a[0] - a[n - 1]
```
Clearly, we only need to care about the first and the last element, and we can safely skip the rest in the middle. Now just check for all possible cases of `s[0]` and `s[n - 1]`, and we are done.

# KPERMS
**Statement**: Given 2 numbers `n` and `k`. Find a permutation of `n` (call it `p`) so that the set of:
```
{ |p[1] - p[2]|, |p[2] - p[3]|, ..., |p[n - 1] - p[n]| }
```
has exactly `k` different elements.

**Trivia**: My solution isn't really as nice as the official one. I kinda wasted some time stress testing before getting one-hit-AC. The official solution solves two base cases: `k = 1` and `k = n - 1`. Then, for general cases, they split it into two parts, one half with `n - k - 1` and one half with `k + 1`, and combine it together.

**Solution**: Let's consider the case of `n = 6, k = 3`. The permutation first looks like `1 2 3 4 5 6`. Now, we only have one unique value, while `k = 3`.<br/>
* If we put `6` after `1` (`1 6 2 3 4 5`), we have 3 unique values.
* If we put `5` after `2` (`1 6 2 5 3 4`), we have 5 unique values.

=> Every time we put `n - i + 1` after `i`, the number of unique values increases by 2.

Now, the number of unique numbers will be odd if we continue this way. But, what if it's even, say, `k = 4`?

Let's look at the permutation where `n = 6, k = 5` (`1 6 2 5 3 4`). The last element that was being moved is `5`. So, reversing all elements after `5` (`1 6 2 5 4 3`) will give us the answer.

# K-NUMBERS
**Statement**: Given an array `a` with size `n`, members of which will have the value from `1` to `n`. The *k-amazing number* is the smallest number that appears on all contiguous subarrays with size `k` of `a`. If such number doesn't exist, define it as `-1`.

**Trivia**: I was really quick to solve this problem, because it's a complete rip-off from [this Codeforces problem](https://codeforces.com/contest/1417/problem/C). Because I have solved it before, it's completely legal to use my own code. Also, the source of the problem isn't mentioned anywhere, which is concerning. I'm sure upsolving one problem on Codeforces is better than on your local machine.

**Solution**: The English editorial for this problem is already in the link above.

# ATRAVEL
**Statement**: Given `n` points with their coordinates on a 2D plane. Point `i` can go directly to point `j`, if `xi > xj` and `yi < yj`. For each `k` from `1` to `n`, count the number of paths with length `k`.

**Trivia**:
I got the idea of DP very early, but when optimization is required, I failed. I tried converting this to a digraph problem and solve the problem like a DP-on-tree problem. I thought the complexity was good enough to pass, but it only got me 3 more test cases than the pre-optimized version. I went to VNOI's [Discord server](https://discord.gg/TDyYVyd) to ask, and it turned out it wasn't DP-on-tree, but Fenwick Tree is used to optimize.

**Solution**: Let's define `dp[i][x]` as the number of paths with length `x`, starting from `i`. It's obvious, that the answer for each `k` is the sum of `dp[i][k]` for every `i` from `1` to `n`. The DP transition is, if `i` can go to `j`, then `dp[i][x] += dp[j][x - 1]`. The base case is `dp[i][1] = 1`, which is rather obvious. One can quickly write an `O(n^3)` solution like this:
```cpp
for (int x = 2; x <= n; ++x) {
    for (int i = 1; i <= n; ++i) {
        for (int j = 1; j <= n; ++j) {
            if (x[i] > x[j] and y[i] < y[j]) {
                dp[i][x] += dp[j][x - 1];
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Now, how are we going to optimize the solution? We can use a Fenwick Tree, as mentioned above, to optimize the third for-loop. There are a few things to work out before optimizing. First, we sort all points by greater `x`, and then by greater `y`. Next, compress the values of `x` so that the values can fit inside a Fenwick Tree. After having the preprocess steps done, our `O(n^2 * log n)` looks like this:
```cpp
for (int x = 2; x <= n; ++x) {
    for (int i = 1; i <= n; ++i) {
        dp[i][x] = get(compressed(i) - 1);
        update(compressed(i), dp[i][x - 1]);
    }
}
```
